---
layout: default
title: Knowledge Base
---

# Knowledge Base

Damage report! I will obey your orders. I will serve this ship as First Officer. And in an attack against the Enterprise, I will die with this crew. But I will not break my oath of loyalty to Starfleet. Ensign Babyface! Smooth as an android's bottom, eh, Data? Fear is the true enemy, the only enemy. Now, how the hell do we defeat an enemy that knows us better than we know ourselves? Congratulations - you just destroyed the Enterprise. Is it my imagination, or have tempers become a little frayed on the ship lately? The Federation's gone; the Borg is everywhere! Then maybe you should consider this: if anything happens to them, Starfleet is going to want a full investigation. Some days you get the bear, and some days the bear gets you. Maybe if we felt any human loss as keenly as we feel one of those close to us, human history would be far less bloody. Maybe if we felt any human loss as keenly as we feel one of those close to us, human history would be far less bloody. Yesterday I did not know how to eat gagh. The look in your eyes, I recognize it. You used to have it for me. Mr. Worf, you do remember how to fire phasers? Sure. You'd be surprised how far a hug goes with Geordi, or Worf. I recommend you don't fire until you're within 40,000 kilometers. Your head is not an artifact! When has justice ever been as simple as a rule book? When has justice ever been as simple as a rule book? Well, I'll say this for him - he's sure of himself. The Enterprise computer system is controlled by three primary main processor cores, cross-linked with a redundant melacortz ramistat, fourteen kiloquad interface modules. We could cause a diplomatic crisis. Take the ship into the Neutral Zone What? We're not at all alike! I'd like to think that I haven't changed those things, sir. A lot of things can change in twelve years, Admiral.

## Sub Heading

Some days you get the bear, and some days the bear gets you. I recommend you don't fire until you're within 40,000 kilometers. Captain, why are we out here chasing comets? Mr. Worf, you do remember how to fire phasers? I'll alert the crew. and attack the Romulans. My oath is between Captain Kargan and myself. Your only concern is with how you obey my orders. Or do you prefer the rank of prisoner to that of lieutenant? I guess it's better to be lucky than good. You're going to be an interesting companion, Mr. Data. I think you've let your personal feelings cloud your judgement. The Enterprise computer system is controlled by three primary main processor cores, cross-linked with a redundant melacortz ramistat, fourteen kiloquad interface modules. I suggest you drop it, Mr. Data. Well, that's certainly good to know. What's a knock-out like you doing in a computer-generated gin joint like this? A surprise party? Mr. Worf, I hate surprise parties. I would *never* do that to you. Yes, absolutely, I do indeed concur, wholeheartedly! Now we know what they mean by 'advanced' tactical training. Maybe we better talk out here; the observation lounge has turned into a swamp. I'm afraid I still don't understand, sir. Computer, belay that order. I can't. As much as I care about you, my first duty is to the ship. Worf, It's better than music. It's jazz.
